CS 429/529: Introduction to Machine Learning

03/31/2026

Assignment 3: Sentiment Analysis using Feedforward Neural
Networks
Purposes
We are going to use Feedforward Neural Networks (FNNs) to perform sentiment analysis on the IMDb movie
reviews.
• Case study of sentiment analysis (textbook Page 247 - 260).
• Processing text using sklearn.feature extraction.text.
• Building and training basic FNNs using PyTorch.
• Training an FNN using k-Fold Cross Validation.
• Dropout Regularization on FNNs.
• Ensemble Learning.

Implementation Tasks
1. (1 point) Data Preparation. You are required to download and transform the text reviews to term frequencyinverse document frequency (tf-idf) vectors. You may use the approach and the programs in the textbook
to do so. Make sure that all text reviews are cleaned and correctly transformed. You may use 70% data as
training data and the rest as test data.
2. (1 point) Building an FNN. Define an FNN classifier which takes a tf-idf vector, i.e., the vector representation
of a review, and predicts the writer’s attitude: 1 for positive and 0 for negative. This task should be solved
together with the next one. You need to tune your model, i.e., changing the number of layers or neurons, to
see if a good accuracy can be obtained by training.
3. (2 points) Training a Baseline Model and Tuning the Hyperparameters. You are required to tune the
FNN’s structure (the previous task) and try a few values for learning rate and weight decay (L2-regularization
parameter), to obtain an accuracy as high as possible or ≥ 90%. Compare the accuracy and time cost to
the logistic regression model in the textbook. Please feel free to add more layers and neurons to make the
FNN as powerful as possible. If the training performance is bad, please use torch.optim.Adam which often
has a better performance than torch.optim.SGD in deep learning.
4. (3 points) Training using k-Fold Cross Validation. We learned how to use k-fold cross validation in scikitlearn. But the PyTorch training functions does not directly support k-fold cross validation. In order to use
this technique, you are required to implement a basic k-fold cross validation in training an FNN. You may
first read the tutorial and then adapt the code for your program. Comparing the performance (time cost,
training accuracy and test accuracy) of the training results with and without k-fold cross validation. You
may tune the value of k for a good performance.
5. (3 points) Training using Dropout Regularization. The dropout regularization on a baseline FNN is to
create a simplified version by randomly dropping out a subset of the edges. You may use the FNN in Task
2 and train it without regularization. It can be performed by the PyTorch function dropout. You may first
read the detailed tutorial, to see how a dropout model can be created, and then complete the following two
tasks:
• (1 point) Create a single dropout model and compare its performance with the baseline model. You
may tune the dropout probability for each layer.
• (2 points) Create a set (≥ 5) of different dropout models, train them using bagging and compare the
performance with the baseline model. You may tune the dropout probability for each layer.

03/31/2026

Report
You are required to write a report for this assignment. It should contain the following parts:
• For Task 2, a brief description of the FNN you used in your experiments.
• For Task 3, give the final parameters you used after tuning, and show the comparison (time cost and accuracy)
to the logistic regression model in the textbook.
• For Task 4, show the time cost and (training & test) accuracy comparisons with the baseline model.
• For Task 5.1 and 5.2, show the time cost and (training & test) accuracy comparisons with the baseline
model.

2

